README.md, before:

# `buf-breaking-action`

This [Action][actions] enables you to run [breaking change detection][breaking] with
[Buf] in your GitHub Actions pipelines. If it detects breaking changes in a pull request, it
automatically creates inline comments under specific lines in your `.proto` files.

![image](./static/img/breaking.png)

`buf-breaking-action` is also commonly used alongside other `buf` Actions, such as
[`buf-lint`][buf-lint], which [lints][lint] Protobuf sources, and [`buf-push`][buf-push],
which pushes Buf [modules] to the  [Buf Schema Registry][bsr] (BSR). See [example
configurations](#example-configurations) for more.

## Usage

Here's an example usage of the `buf-breaking` Action:

```yaml
on: pull_request # Apply to all pull requests
jobs:
  validate-protos:
    steps:
      # Run `git checkout`
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      # Install the `buf` CLI
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-setup-action@v1
      # Run breaking change detection against the `main` branch
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-breaking-action@v1
        with:
          against: 'https://github.com/acme/weather.git#branch=main'
```

With this configuration, the `buf` CLI detects breaking changes between the Protobuf sources in the
current branch against the `main` branch of the repository.

## Prerequisites

For the `buf-breaking` Action to run, you need to install the `buf` CLI in the GitHub Actions Runner
first. We recommend using the [`buf-setup`][buf-setup] Action to install it (as in the example
[above](#usage)).

## Configuration

You can configure `buf-breaking-action` with these parameters:

Parameter | Description | Required | Default
:---------|:------------|:---------|:-------
`input` |  The path of the [Buf input][input] you want to compare with `against` | | `.`
`against` | The reference to check compatibility against | ✅ |
`buf_input_https_username` | The username for the repository to check compatibility against. | | [`${{github.actor}}`][context]
`buf_input_https_password` | The password for the repository to check compatibility against. | | [`${{github.token}}`][context]
`buf_token` | The Buf [authentication token][token] used for private [inputs][input]. | |

> These parameters are derived from [`action.yml`](./action.yml).

### Constraints

For the `buf-breaking-action` to detect changes successfully, both the `input` and the `against`
need to be properly formed inputs, that is, `buf` needs to be able to [build][buf-build] both into
a [Buf image][image]. You can verify this locally using the [`buf build`][buf-build] command on both inputs.
Some examples:

```sh
# Build the `main` branch
buf build .git#branch=main

# Build the v0.1.0 feature tag
buf build .git#ref=v0.1.0

# Build the Protobuf sources in a sub-directory
buf build ./proto
```

### Example configurations

Example | Config file
:-------|:-----------
Simple breaking change detection | [`examples/simple-change-detection.yaml`](./examples/simple-change-detection.yaml)
Detect breaking changes, then push | [`examples/detect-and-push.yaml`](./examples/detect-and-push.yaml)
Detect breaking changes in a sub-directory | [`examples/detect-in-directory.yaml`](./examples/detect-in-directory.yaml)

## Common tasks

### Run on push

A common Buf workflow in GitHub Actions is to push the Protobuf sources in the current branch to the
[Buf Schema Registry][bsr] if no breaking changes are detected against the previous commit (where
`ref` is `HEAD~1`).

```yaml
on: # Apply to all pushes to `main`
  push:
    branches:
      - main
jobs:
  validate-protos:
    steps:
      # Run `git checkout`
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      # Install the `buf` CLI
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-setup-action@v1
      # Run breaking change detection against the last commit
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-breaking-action@v1
        with:
          against: 'https://github.com/acme/weather.git#branch=main,ref=HEAD~1'
```

### Run against input in sub-directory

Some repositories are structured in such a way that their [`buf.yaml`][buf-yaml] is defined in a
sub-directory alongside their Protobuf sources, such as a `proto/` directory. Here's an example:

```sh
$ tree
.
└── proto
    ├── acme
    │   └── weather
    │       └── v1
    │           └── weather.proto
    └── buf.yaml
```

In that case, you can target the `proto` sub-directory by setting

* `input` to `proto`, and
* `subdir` to `proto` in the `against` reference.

```yaml
steps:
  - uses: actions/checkout@v2
  - uses: bufbuild/buf-setup-action@v1
  # Run breaking change detection against the last commit
  - uses: bufbuild/buf-breaking-action@v1
    with:
      input: 'proto'
      against: 'https://github.com/acme/weather.git#branch=main,ref=HEAD~1,subdir=proto'
```

[actions]: https://docs.github.com/actions
[breaking]: https://docs.buf.build/breaking
[bsr]: https://docs.buf.build/bsr
[buf]: https://buf.build
[buf-build]: https://docs.buf.build/build/usage
[buf-lint]: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/buf-lint
[buf-push]: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/buf-push
[buf-setup]: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/buf-setup
[buf-yaml]: https://docs.buf.build/configuration/v1/buf-yaml
[context]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/contexts#github-context
[image]: https://docs.buf.build/reference/images
[input]: https://docs.buf.build/reference/inputs
[lint]: https://docs.buf.build/lint/usage
[modules]: https://docs.buf.build/bsr/overview#module
[token]: https://docs.buf.build/bsr/authentication#create-an-api-token

Commit message:

followup on breaking changes output (#26)
Co-authored-by: Jef LeCompte <jeffreylec@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# `buf-breaking-action`

This [Action][actions] enables you to run [breaking change detection][breaking] with
[Buf] in your GitHub Actions pipelines. If it detects breaking changes in a pull request, it
automatically creates inline comments under specific lines in your `.proto` files.

![image](./static/img/breaking.png)

`buf-breaking-action` is also commonly used alongside other `buf` Actions, such as
[`buf-lint`][buf-lint], which [lints][lint] Protobuf sources, and [`buf-push`][buf-push],
which pushes Buf [modules] to the  [Buf Schema Registry][bsr] (BSR). See [example
configurations](#example-configurations) for more.

## Usage

Here's an example usage of the `buf-breaking` Action:

```yaml
on: pull_request # Apply to all pull requests
jobs:
  validate-protos:
    steps:
      # Run `git checkout`
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      # Install the `buf` CLI
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-setup-action@v1
      # Run breaking change detection against the `main` branch
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-breaking-action@v1
        with:
          against: 'https://github.com/acme/weather.git#branch=main'
```

With this configuration, the `buf` CLI detects breaking changes between the Protobuf sources in the
current branch against the `main` branch of the repository.

## Prerequisites

For the `buf-breaking` Action to run, you need to install the `buf` CLI in the GitHub Actions Runner
first. We recommend using the [`buf-setup`][buf-setup] Action to install it (as in the example
[above](#usage)).

## Configuration

You can configure `buf-breaking-action` with these parameters:

Parameter | Description | Required | Default
:---------|:------------|:---------|:-------
`input` |  The path of the [Buf input][input] you want to compare with `against` | | `.`
`against` | The reference to check compatibility against | ✅ |
`buf_input_https_username` | The username for the repository to check compatibility against. | | [`${{github.actor}}`][context]
`buf_input_https_password` | The password for the repository to check compatibility against. | | [`${{github.token}}`][context]
`buf_token` | The Buf [authentication token][token] used for private [inputs][input]. | |

> These parameters are derived from [`action.yml`](./action.yml).

### Output

| Parameter | Description                                                       |
|-----------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `results` | The generated breaking change messages with the file annotations. |

### Constraints

For the `buf-breaking-action` to detect changes successfully, both the `input` and the `against`
need to be properly formed inputs, that is, `buf` needs to be able to [build][buf-build] both into
a [Buf image][image]. You can verify this locally using the [`buf build`][buf-build] command on both inputs.
Some examples:

```sh
# Build the `main` branch
buf build .git#branch=main

# Build the v0.1.0 feature tag
buf build .git#ref=v0.1.0

# Build the Protobuf sources in a sub-directory
buf build ./proto
```

### Example configurations

Example | Config file
:-------|:-----------
Simple breaking change detection | [`examples/simple-change-detection.yaml`](./examples/simple-change-detection.yaml)
Detect breaking changes, then push | [`examples/detect-and-push.yaml`](./examples/detect-and-push.yaml)
Detect breaking changes in a sub-directory | [`examples/detect-in-directory.yaml`](./examples/detect-in-directory.yaml)

## Common tasks

### Run on push

A common Buf workflow in GitHub Actions is to push the Protobuf sources in the current branch to the
[Buf Schema Registry][bsr] if no breaking changes are detected against the previous commit (where
`ref` is `HEAD~1`).

```yaml
on: # Apply to all pushes to `main`
  push:
    branches:
      - main
jobs:
  validate-protos:
    steps:
      # Run `git checkout`
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      # Install the `buf` CLI
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-setup-action@v1
      # Run breaking change detection against the last commit
      - uses: bufbuild/buf-breaking-action@v1
        with:
          against: 'https://github.com/acme/weather.git#branch=main,ref=HEAD~1'
```

### Run against input in sub-directory

Some repositories are structured in such a way that their [`buf.yaml`][buf-yaml] is defined in a
sub-directory alongside their Protobuf sources, such as a `proto/` directory. Here's an example:

```sh
$ tree
.
└── proto
    ├── acme
    │   └── weather
    │       └── v1
    │           └── weather.proto
    └── buf.yaml
```

In that case, you can target the `proto` sub-directory by setting

* `input` to `proto`, and
* `subdir` to `proto` in the `against` reference.

```yaml
steps:
  - uses: actions/checkout@v2
  - uses: bufbuild/buf-setup-action@v1
  # Run breaking change detection against the last commit
  - uses: bufbuild/buf-breaking-action@v1
    with:
      input: 'proto'
      against: 'https://github.com/acme/weather.git#branch=main,ref=HEAD~1,subdir=proto'
```

[actions]: https://docs.github.com/actions
[breaking]: https://docs.buf.build/breaking
[bsr]: https://docs.buf.build/bsr
[buf]: https://buf.build
[buf-build]: https://docs.buf.build/build/usage
[buf-lint]: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/buf-lint
[buf-push]: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/buf-push
[buf-setup]: https://github.com/marketplace/actions/buf-setup
[buf-yaml]: https://docs.buf.build/configuration/v1/buf-yaml
[context]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/contexts#github-context
[image]: https://docs.buf.build/reference/images
[input]: https://docs.buf.build/reference/inputs
[lint]: https://docs.buf.build/lint/usage
[modules]: https://docs.buf.build/bsr/overview#module
[token]: https://docs.buf.build/bsr/authentication#create-an-api-token
